README.md, before:

# next-auth-template<br />![Built on next.js](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/next?style=flat-square) ![Built on next-auth](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/next-auth?style=flat-square) ![Built on drizzle-orm](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/drizzle-orm?style=flat-square) ![Built on zod](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/zod?style=flat-square)

This template gets you up a running with social sign in, magic links, database-backed sessions, and account creation and setup. It's a good starting point for your next project.

## Features

- Custom sign in and sign up pages as a starting point for your own
- Database-backed sessions all managed for you thanks to [Auth.js](https://authjs.dev/) and [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/)
- Basic account creation and set up for first time users
- Google Sign-in ready for config, easily add [other providers Auth.js has to offer](https://authjs.dev/reference/core/providers)
- [Magic Links](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/email) via [Resend](https://resend.com/emails) ready for config, or [any other email provider Auth.js can support](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/email#providers), or don't use magic links at all
- Protected paths via middleware, easily customisable to your needs

> [!NOTE]
> This template uses major dependencies that are not yet stable. It is not recommended for production use until `next-auth` and `drizzle-orm` are stable

# Getting Started

There is some initial setup required to get this template up and running. It won't take long.

## Prerequisites

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) installed
- A PostgreSQL database. This template uses [Neon](https://neon.tech/), but there are other options.

## Installation

1. Clone this repo, or [use it as a GitHub template](https://github.com/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/generate) (using Vercel? [Deploy template](<https://vercel.com/new/clone?repository-url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template&env=DATABASE_URL,NEXTAUTH_URL,AUTH_SECRET,AUTH_GOOGLE_ID,AUTH_GOOGLE_SECRET,AUTH_RESEND_KEY,AUTH_MAGIC_LINK_EMAIL_FROM&envDescription=API%20keys%20needed%20for%20signing%20in%20with%20Google%20and%20emailing%20magic%20links&envLink=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template%3Ftab%3Dreadme-ov-file%23envrionment-variables&redirect-url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template%3Ftab%3Dreadme-ov-file%23next-auth-template&demo-title=See%20next-auth-template%20in%20action&demo-description=An%20(almost)%20vanilla%20deploy%20of%20this%20template.%20Resets%20any%20users%20and%20sessions%20every%20few%20hours.&demo-url=https%3A%2F%2Fnext-auth-template-demo.vercel.app%2F&demo-image=https%3A%2F%2Fcamo.githubusercontent.com%2Fc69f49b98c29ba792daf811661b5448ec743f721047119358ac2603ca0531b73%2F68747470733a2f2f6a616b6569736f6e6c696e652e636f6d2f6f70656e67726170682d696d6167652e706e67>))
2. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in the values (see [Environment Variables](#environment-variables) below)
3. Run `pnpm install && pnpm run db:push` to install dependencies and push the database schema
4. Run `pnpm run dev` to start the development server
5. Navigate to `http://localhost:3000`, and click the "Sign up" or "Sign in" buttons

# Environment Variables

This template relies on environment variables to work. You can use the `.env.example` file as a starting guide; rename `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in the values.

| Variable Name                | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `DATABASE_URL`               | The database connection string. Required.                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| `AUTH_URL`                   | The URL of your site. This is used to generate links for magic links and for the callback URL for social sign in. Can be localhost when running locally. Required. [NextAuth.js#nextauth_url](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/deployment#auth_url) |
| `AUTH_SECRET`                | A secret used to sign cookies and to sign and verify JSON Web Tokens. [See Auth.js docs on how to generate](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/deployment#auth_secret). Required in production.                                                       |
| `AUTH_GOOGLE_ID`             | The Client ID for your Google OAuth app. Required for social sign in. [See Auth.js docs for set up.](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/providers/google#setup)                                                                                       |
| `AUTH_GOOGLE_SECRET`         | The Client Secret for your Google OAuth app. Required for social sign in. [See Auth.js docs for set up.](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/providers/google#setup)                                                                                   |
| `AUTH_RESEND_KEY`            | The API key for [Resend](https://resend.com/). Required for magic links.                                                                                                                                                                              |
| `AUTH_MAGIC_LINK_EMAIL_FROM` | The email address to send magic links from. Required for magic links.                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Commit message:

add information about customising the template

README.md, after:

# next-auth-template<br />![Built on next.js](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/next?style=flat-square) ![Built on next-auth](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/next-auth?style=flat-square) ![Built on drizzle-orm](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/drizzle-orm?style=flat-square) ![Built on zod](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/dependency-version/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/zod?style=flat-square)

This template gets you up a running with social sign in, magic links, database-backed sessions, and account creation and setup. It's a good starting point for your next project.

## Features

- Custom sign in and sign up pages as a starting point for your own
- Database-backed sessions all managed for you thanks to [Auth.js](https://authjs.dev/) and [Drizzle ORM](https://orm.drizzle.team/)
- Basic account creation and set up for first time users
- Google Sign-in ready for config, easily add [other providers Auth.js has to offer](https://authjs.dev/reference/core/providers)
- Optional [Magic Links](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/email) via [Resend](https://resend.com/emails) ready for config, or [any other email provider Auth.js can support](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/email#providers)
- Protected paths via middleware, easily customisable to your needs

> [!NOTE]
> This template uses major dependencies that are not yet stable. It is not recommended for production use until `next-auth` and `drizzle-orm` are stable

# Getting Started

There is some initial setup required to get this template up and running. It won't take long.

## Prerequisites

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) installed
- A PostgreSQL database. This template uses [Neon](https://neon.tech/), but there are other options.

## Installation

1. Clone this repo, or [use it as a GitHub template](https://github.com/jakeisonline/next-auth-template/generate) (using Vercel? [Deploy template](<https://vercel.com/new/clone?repository-url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template&env=DATABASE_URL,NEXTAUTH_URL,AUTH_SECRET,AUTH_GOOGLE_ID,AUTH_GOOGLE_SECRET,AUTH_RESEND_KEY,AUTH_MAGIC_LINK_EMAIL_FROM&envDescription=API%20keys%20needed%20for%20signing%20in%20with%20Google%20and%20emailing%20magic%20links&envLink=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template%3Ftab%3Dreadme-ov-file%23envrionment-variables&redirect-url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fjakeisonline%2Fnext-auth-template%3Ftab%3Dreadme-ov-file%23next-auth-template&demo-title=See%20next-auth-template%20in%20action&demo-description=An%20(almost)%20vanilla%20deploy%20of%20this%20template.%20Resets%20any%20users%20and%20sessions%20every%20few%20hours.&demo-url=https%3A%2F%2Fnext-auth-template-demo.vercel.app%2F&demo-image=https%3A%2F%2Fcamo.githubusercontent.com%2Fc69f49b98c29ba792daf811661b5448ec743f721047119358ac2603ca0531b73%2F68747470733a2f2f6a616b6569736f6e6c696e652e636f6d2f6f70656e67726170682d696d6167652e706e67>))
2. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in the values (see [Environment Variables](#environment-variables) below)
3. Run `pnpm install && pnpm run db:push` to install dependencies and push the database schema
4. Run `pnpm run dev` to start the development server
5. Navigate to `http://localhost:3000`, and click the "Sign up" or "Sign in" buttons

# Customising

This template is designed to be as simple as possible, and it's intended that you customise it to your needs, using your own coding skills. Nonetheless, there are some things you can customise to make it easier to get started.

## Database

This template expects a PostgreSQL database, and uses Drizzle ORM to interface with it. Out of the box, Drizzle is configured to use Neon, but you can change this to any other database.

1. In `db/db.ts`, change the `sql` variable to point to your database

See [Drizzle ORM's documentation](https://orm.drizzle.team/docs/get-started-postgresql) for more information.

## Add other Auth.js providers

This template uses Google Sign-in, but you can add other providers Auth.js supports.

1. Browse the available providers in [Auth.js's documentation](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/oauth)
2. Add the required environment variables for your new provider to `.env`
3. In `src/lib/auth.ts`, add the provider to the `providers` array (and be sure to import it!)
4. On your sign in and sign up pages, add `<SocialSignInButton provider="new_provider" />` component where `new_provider` is the name of the provider you added

## Enable Magic Links

Magic links are a great way to sign in users without having to create an account, but are not enabled by default due to requiring an email provider. To enable them, follow these steps:

## Change Email Provider

By default, this template uses [Resend](https://resend.com/emails) to send magic links. You can change this to any other email provider that Auth.js supports.

# Environment Variables

This template relies on environment variables to work. You can use the `.env.example` file as a starting guide; rename `.env.example` to `.env` and fill in the values.

| Variable Name                | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `DATABASE_URL`               | The database connection string. Required.                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| `AUTH_URL`                   | The URL of your site. This is used to generate links for magic links and for the callback URL for social sign in. Can be localhost when running locally. Required. [NextAuth.js#nextauth_url](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/deployment#auth_url) |
| `AUTH_SECRET`                | A secret used to sign cookies and to sign and verify JSON Web Tokens. [See Auth.js docs on how to generate](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/deployment#auth_secret). Required in production.                                                       |
| `AUTH_GOOGLE_ID`             | The Client ID for your Google OAuth app. Required for social sign in. [See Auth.js docs for set up.](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/providers/google#setup)                                                                                       |
| `AUTH_GOOGLE_SECRET`         | The Client Secret for your Google OAuth app. Required for social sign in. [See Auth.js docs for set up.](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/providers/google#setup)                                                                                   |
| `AUTH_RESEND_KEY`            | The API key for [Resend](https://resend.com/). Required for magic links.                                                                                                                                                                              |
| `AUTH_MAGIC_LINK_EMAIL_FROM` | The email address to send magic links from. Required for magic links.                                                                                                                                                                                 |
